== Creating test database

By default unit tests use MySQL database but PostgreSQL, Oracle and SQL Server databases are supported as well. Set MONDRIAN_DRIVER environment variable to "mysql" (default), "postgresql", "oracle", "mssql" (jTDS), "sqlserver" (Microsoft JDBC), "vertica", "snowflake", "clickhouse", "mariadb" to specify database driver that should be used.

If using MySQL, PostgreSQL or SQL Server database then create database user mondrian_test with password mondrian_test, create database mondrian_test and grant full access to this database for mondrian_test user. By default it is assumed that database is located on localhost (can be overridden with DATABASE_HOST environment variable).

If using Oracle database then create database user mondrian_test with password mondrian_test. By default it is assumed that database orcl is located on localhost (can be overridden with DATABASE_NAME and DATABASE_HOST environment variables).

if using Vertica then specify environment variables VERTICA_DATABASE_HOST, VERTICA_DATABASE_NAME, VERTICA_DATABASE_USER, VERTICA_DATABASE_PASSWORD and create the "mondrian_test" schema.

If using Snowflake then create MONDRIAN_TEST user, database and schema and specify environment variables SNOWFLAKE_DATABASE_HOST and SNOWFLAKE_DATABASE_PASSWORD.

If using ClickHouse then create database user mondrian_test with password mondrian_test, create database mondrian_test and grant full access to this database for mondrian_test user. Specify environment variable CLICKHOUSE_DATABASE_HOST. Download the latest clickhouse-jdbc-*-shaded.jar and copy to spec/support/jars.

If using MariaDB ColumnStore then create database user mondrian_test with password mondrian_test, create database mondrian_test and grant full access to this database for mondrian_test user. Specify environment variable MARIADB_DATABASE_HOST. Download mariadb-java-client-*.jar and copy to spec/support/jars.

See spec/spec_helper.rb for details of default connection parameters and how to override them.

== Creating test data

Install necessary gems with

  bundle install

Create tables with test data using

  rake db:create_data

or specify which database driver to use

  rake db:create_data MONDRIAN_DRIVER=mysql
  rake db:create_data MONDRIAN_DRIVER=postgresql
  rake db:create_data MONDRIAN_DRIVER=oracle
  rake db:create_data MONDRIAN_DRIVER=mssql
  rake db:create_data MONDRIAN_DRIVER=sqlserver

In case of Vertica, Snowflake, ClickHouse, MariaDB ColumnStore at first create test data in MySQL and export test data into CSV files and then import CSV files into the analytical database (because inserting individual records into these analytical databases is very slow):

  rake db:export_data MONDRIAN_DRIVER=mysql
  rake db:create_data MONDRIAN_DRIVER=vertica
  rake db:create_data MONDRIAN_DRIVER=snowflake
  rake db:create_data MONDRIAN_DRIVER=clickhouse
  rake db:create_data MONDRIAN_DRIVER=mariadb

== Running tests

Run tests with

  rake spec

or specify which database driver to use

  rake spec MONDRIAN_DRIVER=mysql
  rake spec MONDRIAN_DRIVER=postgresql
  rake spec MONDRIAN_DRIVER=oracle
  rake spec MONDRIAN_DRIVER=mssql
  rake spec MONDRIAN_DRIVER=sqlserver
  rake spec MONDRIAN_DRIVER=vertica
  rake spec MONDRIAN_DRIVER=snowflake
  rake spec MONDRIAN_DRIVER=clickhouse
  rake spec MONDRIAN_DRIVER=mariadb

or also alternatively with

  rake spec:mysql
  rake spec:postgresql
  rake spec:oracle
  rake spec:mssql
  rake spec:sqlserver
  rake spec:vertica
  rake spec:snowflake
  rake spec:clickhouse
  rake spec:mariadb

You can also run all tests on all standard databases (mysql jdbc_mysql postgresql oracle mssql) with

  rake spec:all

== JRuby versions

It is recommended to use RVM (http://rvm.beginrescueend.com) to run tests with different JRuby implementations. mondrian-olap is being tested with latest versions of JRuby 9.2 on Java 8 and 11.
